---
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Cam Coulter <git@camcoulter.com>
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
title: "2017 in Reading"
description: "Here's what I read in 2017."
date: 2018-01-04T13:52:00-08:00 # PST is -08:00, PDT is -07:00
categorizedUnder:
- reading
taggedWith:
- year in review
- space opera
- manga
- comics
- Ann Leckie
- Natsuki Takaya
- Brian K. Vaughan
- Pia Guerra
- Philip Ardagh
- James S.A. Corey
image: books-03
---

[INSERT_TOC]

## Introduction

Here's everything I read in 2017:

- <cite>Fruits Basket Collector's Edition, Vol. 5</cite> by Natsuki Takaya <i>(manga)</i>
- "The Venus Effect" by Joseph Allen Hill
- <cite>Liselotte and Witch's Forest 2</cite> by Natsuki Takaya <i>(manga)</i>
- <cite>Ancillary Sword</cite> by Ann Leckie
- <cite>The Four Pillars of Investing</cite> by William Bernstein
- <cite>Ancillary Mercy</cite> by Ann Leckie
- <cite>The Last Witness</cite> by K.J. Parker
- <cite>Star*Line 40.1</cite> ed F.J. Bergmann <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>The Dream-Quest of Vellitt Boe</cite> by Kij Johnson
- <cite>Binti: Home</cite> by Nnedi Okorafor
- <cite>Pansy</cite> by Andrea Gibson <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>Fruits Basket Collector's Edition, Vol. 6</cite> by Natsuki Takaya <i>(manga)</i>
- <cite>Our Super Adventure</cite> by Sarah Graley <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>Early Retirement Extreme</cite> by Jacob Lund Fisker
- <cite>Finding My Elegy</cite> by Ursula K. Le Guin <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>How to Think About Money</cite> by Jonathan Clements
- <cite>The Pocketknife Bible</cite> by Anis Mojgani <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>The Left Hand of Darkness</cite> by Ursula K. Le Guin
- <cite>Community and Growth</cite> by Jean Vanier
- <cite>The Fall of Fergal</cite> by Philip Ardagh
- <cite>Heir of Mystery</cite> by Philip Ardagh
- <cite>The Rise of the House of McNally</cite> by Philip Ardagh
- <cite>Arcadia</cite> by Tom Stoppard <i>(play)</i>
- <cite>The Tombs of Atuan</cite> by Ursula K. Le Guin
- <cite>The Bad Beginning</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>The Reptile Room</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>The Wide Window</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>Liselotte and Witch's Forest 3</cite> by Natsuki Takaya <i>(manga)</i>
- <cite>Fruits Basket Collector's Edition, Vol. 7</cite> by Natsuki Takaya <i>(manga)</i>
- "Semiotic Disobedience" by Sonia Katyal
- <cite>Use of Weapons</cite> by Iain M. Banks
- <cite>All Systems Red</cite> by Martha Wells
- <cite>Fruits Basket Collector's Edition, Vol. 8</cite> by Natsuki Takaya <i>(manga)</i>
- <cite>Oracle Bones</cite> by Peter Hessler
- <cite>The Churn</cite> by James S.A. Corey
- <cite>The 2017 Rhysling Anthology</cite> ed David C. Kopaska-Merkel <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>Passing Strange</cite> by Ellen Klages
- <cite>The Invisible Hand</cite> by Ayad Akhtar <i>(play)</i>
- <cite>Fruits Basket Collector's Edition, Vol. 9</cite> by Natsuki Takaya <i>(manga)</i>
- <cite>The Things We Do For Love</cite> by K.J. Parker
- <cite>Killing Gravity</cite> by Corey J. White
- <cite>Fruits Basket Collector's Edition, Vol. 10</cite> by Natsuki Takaya <i>(manga)</i>
- <cite>On Bullshit</cite> by Harry Frankfurt
- <cite>Hammers on Bone</cite> by Cassandra Khaw
- <cite>Fruits Basket Collector's Edition, Vol. 11</cite> by Natsuki Takaya <i>(manga)</i>
- <cite>Fruits Basket Collector's Edition, Vol. 12</cite> by Natsuki Takaya <i>(manga)</i>
- <cite>Y: The Last Man -- Book One</cite> by Brian K. Vaughan and Pia Guerra <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>Y: The Last Man: One Small Step</cite> by Brian K. Vaughan and Pia Guerra <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>The Civil Servant's Notebook</cite> by Wang Xiaofang
- <cite>Theatre Topics: Volume 25, Number 3, September 2015</cite> ed Gwendolyn Alker
- <cite>The Farthest Shore</cite> by Ursula K. Le Guin
- <cite>The Fault in Our Stars</cite> by John Green
- <cite>Stunt Water</cite> by Buddy Wakefield <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>Dwarf Stars 2017</cite> ed Robin Mayhall <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>The New Rosary in Scripture</cite> by Edward Sri
- <cite>Code 2.0</cite> by Lawrence Lessig
- <cite>Star*Line 40.2</cite> ed F.J. Bergmann <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>Y: The Last Man: Safeword</cite> by Brian K. Vaughan and Pia Guerra <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>Y: The Last Man -- Book Three</cite> by Brian K. Vaughan and Pia Guerra <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>Down Among the Sticks and Bones</cite> by Seanan McGuire
- <cite>Screaming</cite> by John Reinhart <i>(poetry chapbook)</i>
- <cite>Y: The Last Man -- Book Four</cite> by Brian K. Vaughan and Pia Guerra <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>Steering the Craft: A 21st-Century Guide to Sailing the Sea of Story</cite> by Ursula K. Le Guin
- <cite>Y: The Last Man -- Book Five</cite> by Brian K. Vaughan and Pia Guerra <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom</cite> by Cory Doctorow
- <cite>Witches of Lychford</cite> by Paul Cornell
- <cite>Tranny: Confessions of Punk Rock's Most Infamous Anarchist Sellout</cite> by Laura Jane Grace
- <cite>Educating for Insurgency</cite> by Jay Gillen
- <cite>Bannerless</cite> by Carrie Vaughn
- <cite>Nightmare Magazine Issue 49: POC Destroy Horror!</cite> ed Silvia Moreno-Garcia
- <cite>Islamic Exceptionalism: How the Struggle Over Islam Is Reshaping the World</cite> by Shadi Hamid
- <cite>Star*Line 40.3</cite> ed F.J. Bergmann <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>Provenance</cite> by Ann Leckie
- <cite>Best American Science Fiction and Fantasy 2016</cite> ed John Joseph Adams
- <cite>How Everything Became War and the Military Became Everything: Tales from the Pentagon</cite> by Rosa Brooks
- <cite>Nemesis Games</cite> by James S.A. Corey

No joke, 2017 was a productive, delightful year in reading for me. As a slight disclaimer, however, I will note that on the above list, I have labeled which reads were plays, comics, and poetry, but I have not labeled which reads were novellas --- and I did read a lot of novellas last year.

Now, let's look at some highlights.

## Ann Leckie

Ann Leckie is my new favorite author. She's the space opera goddess for our times. Last winter, I read her [Imperial Radch trilogy](/2017/02/14/the-imperial-radch-trilogy/), a profound and enjoyable meditation on empire, identity, and justice. And this past autumn, I read her new book [<cite>Provenance</cite>](/2017/12/19/reading/#provenance-by-ann-leckie), which is basically most of the awesomeness of the Radch trilogy condensed into a smaller tale in a new, fascinating civilization. Ann Leckie is a masterful world builder. She pays careful attention to the details of dress and food, she has a keen eye for class differentials, power imbalances, and issues of justice, and she brilliantly and successfully experiments with gender, politics, and aliens. I kind of want to write a dissertation on her.

## <cite>Fruits Basket</cite>

[<cite>Fruits Basket</cite>](/2017/08/01/reading/#fruits-basket-by-natsuki-takaya) is Danae's favorite manga series. I understand why. I also love it. The series features a huge ensemble of well-developed, likable characters who grow and mature together within a beautiful web of mutual relationships. It's one of those series where, by the time you finish reading it, the characters all really feel like your friends. It's fabulous.

## <cite>Y: The Last Man</cite>

My old community-mate Pat introduced this comic book series to me.
[<cite>Y: The Last Man</cite>](/2017/09/25/reading/#y-the-last-man-by-brian-k-vaughan-and-pia-guerra) tells the story of Yorick Brown and his pet monkey, the only two survivors of a mysterious plague that instantly kills every other mammal with a Y chromosome. It's a post-apocalyptic adventure that's fun, interesting, pulpy, enjoyably stupid, well-plotted, tightly-paced, and featuring great characters. It's tons of fun.

## Nonfiction Hits

I read some great nonfiction this year as well. Stand out nonfiction books are:

- [<cite>Code 2.0</cite> by Lawrence Lessig](/2017/08/30/reading/#code-20-by-lawrence-lessig)
- [<cite>Tranny: Confessions of Punk Rock's Most Infamous Anarchist Sellout</cite> by Laura Jane Grace](/2017/11/01/reading/#tranny-confessions-of-punk-rocks-most-infamous-anarchist-sellout-by-laura-jane-grace-with-dan-ozzi)
- [<cite>Islamic Exceptionalism: How the Struggle Over Islam Is Reshaping the World</cite> by Shadi Hamid](/2017/11/01/reading/#islamic-exceptionalism-how-the-struggle-over-islam-is-reshaping-the-world-by-shadi-hamid)
- [<cite>How Everything Became War and the Military Became Everything: Tales from the Pentagon</cite> by Rosa Brooks](/2017/12/19/reading/#how-everything-became-war-and-the-military-became-everything-tales-from-the-pentagon-by-rosa-brooks)

## Awesome Novellas

I read tons of novellas this year. My four favorites are:

- [<cite>All Systems Red</cite> by Martha Wells](/2017/06/23/reading/#all-systems-red-by-martha-wells)
- [<cite>Passing Strange</cite> by Ellen Klages](/2017/06/23/reading/#passing-strange-by-ellen-klages)
- [<cite>The Things We Do For Love</cite> by K.J. Parker](/2017/08/01/reading/#the-things-we-do-for-love-by-kj-parker)
- [<cite>Down Among the Sticks and Bones</cite> by Seanan McGuire](/2017/09/25/reading/#down-among-the-sticks-and-bones-by-seanan-mcguire)

## <cite>Unlikely Exploits</cite>

Philip Ardagh is one of my favorite children's authors because of his <cite>Eddie Dickens</cite> series. This year, I finally got around to reading one of his other series, the [<cite>Unlikely Exploits</cite>](/2017/05/17/reading/#the-fall-of-fergal-heir-of-mystery-and-the-rise-of-the-house-of-mcnally-by-philip-ardagh) trilogy. This trilogy is one of the most delightful, genuinely surprising things I've ever read, and I actually like it more than his <cite>Eddie Dickens</cite> series (which is still very close to my heart). The three books in this trilogy are:

- <cite>The Fall of Fergal</cite> by Philip Ardagh
- <cite>Heir of Mystery</cite> by Philip Ardagh
- <cite>The Rise of the House of McNally</cite> by Philip Ardagh

## <cite>The Expanse</cite>

[*The Expanse*](/2017/12/19/reading/#nemesis-games-by-james-sa-corey) remains at the top on my "Generally Recommended" list. Put simply, *The Expanse* series by James S.A. Corey is the most fun I've ever had reading --- yes, I find it more fun than *Harry Potter*. The first book in the series is *Leviathan Wakes*. Go read that. This past December, I read *Nemesis Games*, the fifth book in the series, and like every other book in the series, it totally rocked.

The series also has a TV show (also called *The Expanse*) airing on Syfy. It's third season starts soon. Go watch it. To my mind, it's the best show currently on air.
