---
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Cam Coulter <git@camcoulter.com>
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
title: "2018 in Reading"
description: "Here's what I read in 2018."
date: 2019-01-20T14:00:00-08:00 # PST is -08:00, PDT is -07:00
categorizedUnder:
- reading
taggedWith:
- year in review
- Hrotsvitha of Gandersheim
- Seanan McGuire
- Nnedi Okorafor
- Walter M. Miller Jr.
- Lemony Snicket
- James S.A. Corey
- Geonn Cannon
- Liu Cixin
image: books-07
---

[INSERT_TOC]

## Introduction

Here's all the books I that read in 2018:

- <cite>The Plays of Roswitha</cite> translated by Christopher St. John
- <cite>UH-OH: The Collected Poetry, Stories and Erotic Sass of Derrick C. Brown</cite> by Derrick C. Brown <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>Dream Hoarders: How the American Upper Middle Class Is Leaving Everyone Else in the Dust, Why That Is a Problem, and What to Do About It</cite> by Richard Reeves
- <cite>Our Super American Adventure</cite> by Sarah Graley <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>Binti: The Night Masquerade</cite> by Nnedi Okorafor
- <cite>Star*Line 40.4</cite> edited by Vince Gotera <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>Beneath the Sugar Sky</cite> by Seanan McGuire
- <cite>The Miserable Mill</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 20</cite> edited by Lynne M. Thomas and Michael Damian Thomas
- <cite>Drink Cultura: Chicanismo</cite> by José Antonio Burciaga
- <cite>Dreams & Nightmares 108</cite> edited by David C. Kopaska-Merkel <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>The Stars Are Legion</cite> by Kameron Hurley
- <cite>Capricious Issue 9: Gender Diverse Pronouns</cite> edited by A.C. Buchanan
- <cite>The Austere Academy</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>Let Your Life Speak: Listening for the Voice of Vocation</cite> by Parker J. Palmer
- <cite>Pole Dancing to Gospel Hymns</cite> by Andrea Gibson <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>The Female Man</cite> by Joanna Russ
- <cite>The Ersatz Elevator</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>The Imperial University: Academic Repression and Scholarly Dissent</cite> edited by Piya Chatterjee and Sunaina Maira
- <cite>The Vile Village</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 21</cite> edited by Lynne M. Thomas and Michael Damian Thomas
- <cite>The Missionary's Curse and Other Tales from a Chinese Catholic Village</cite> by Henrietta Harrison
- <cite>Mythic Delirium 4.4</cite> edited by Mike Allen
- <cite>A Canticle for Leibowitz</cite> by Walter M. Miller Jr.
- <cite>In the Pockets of Small Gods</cite> by Anis Mojgani <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 22</cite> edited by Lynne M. Thomas and Michael Damian Thomas
- <cite>The Hostile Hospital</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>Rendezvous with Rama</cite> by Arthur C. Clarke
- <cite>The Hacked World Order: How Nations Fight, Trade, Maneuver, and Manipulate in the Digital Age</cite> by Adam Segal
- <cite>The Carnivorous Carnival</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>The Slippery Slope</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>The Grim Grotto</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>The Penultimate Peril</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>The End</cite> by Lemony Snicket
- <cite>Phoebe and Her Unicorn</cite> by Dana Simpson <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>The China Questions: Critical Insights into a Rising Power</cite> edited by Jennifer Rudolph and Michael Szonyi
- <cite>Leviathan Wakes</cite> by James S.A. Corey
- <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 23</cite> edited by Lynne M. Thomas and Michael Damian Thomas
- <cite>Teaching Critical Thinking: Practical Wisdom</cite> by bell hooks
- <cite>The Bride was a Boy</cite> by Chii <i>(manga)</i>
- <cite>Babylon's Ashes</cite> by James S.A. Corey
- <cite>Dwarf Stars 2018: The Best Very Short Speculative Poems Published in 2017</cite> edited by Deborah P. Kolodji <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>Broken Metropolis: Queer Tales of a City That Never Was</cite> edited by Dave Ring
- <cite>The Three-Body Problem</cite> by Liu Cixin and translated Ken Liu
- <cite>Transcendent: The Year's Best Transgender Speculative Fiction</cite> edited by K.M. Szpara
- <cite>The Dark Forest</cite> by Liu Cixin and translated Joel Martinsen
- <cite>Fiyah Magazine Issue 7</cite> edited by Justina Ireland, Troy L. Wiggins, and Brandon O’Brien
- <cite>Death's End</cite> by Liu Cixin and translated Ken Liu
- <cite>Capricious Issue 10</cite> edited by A.C. Buchanan
- <cite>Mithila Review Issue 10</cite> edited by Salik Shah and Ajapa Sharma
- <cite>Over the Anvil We Stretch</cite> by Anis Mojgani <i>(poetry)</i>
- <cite>I Am Providence</cite> by Nick Mamatas
- <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 24: Disabled People Destroy Science Fiction!</cite> edited by Dominik Parisien and Elsa Sjunneson-Henry
- <cite>Sword and Sonnet</cite> edited by Aidan Doyle, Rachael K. Jones, E. Catherine Tobler
- <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 25</cite> edited by Lynne M. Thomas and Michael Damian Thomas
- <cite>Kim Reaper: Grim Beginnings</cite> by Sarah Graley <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the Prison</cite> by Michel Foucault
- <cite>The Remnant Fleet</cite> by Geonn Cannon
- <cite>Moonstruck Vol 1: Magic to Brew</cite> by Grace Ellis and Shae Beagle <i>(comics)</i>
- <cite>Amaryllis and Other Stories</cite> by Carrie Vaughn
- <cite>Dreams & Nightmares 109</cite> edited by David C. Kopaska-Merkel <i>(poetry)</i>

Let's review the highlights.

## Hrotsvitha of Gandersheim

[Hrotsvitha of Gandersheim](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hrotsvitha) is so awesome and I love her. She's a 10th-century German canoness, dramatist, and poet who attempted to christianize the work of Terence, the Roman comic playwright. I reread her plays at the start of 2018 and [blogged](/2018/02/08/reading/#the-plays-of-roswitha-translated-by-christopher-st-john) about them.

This year, now that work from 1923 has finally, definitively entered the public domain, an English translation of her plays is now in the public domain. <em>Yay!</em> I [blogged](/2019/01/01/happy-public-domain-day/) about that earlier this month and also shared an ebook of that book that I had designed.

## Novellas

[<cite>Beneath the Sugar Sky</cite>](/2018/02/08/reading/#beneath-the-sugar-sky-by-seanan-mcguire) by Seanan McGuire was another fabulous entry in Seanan McGuire's fabulous <cite>Wayward Children</cite> series.

[<cite>Binti: The Night Masquerade</cite>](/2018/02/08/reading/#binti-the-night-masquerade-by-nnedi-okorafor) by Nnedi Okorafor is a delightful and surprising conclusion to Nnedi Okorafor's <cite>Binti</cite> trilogy.

## <cite>A Canticle for Leibowitz</cite> by Walter M. Miller Jr.

Wow. This science fiction classic is funny, powerful, and stunningly unique, even 60 years later. [I loved it.](/2018/07/16/reading/#a-canticle-for-leibowitz-by-walter-m-miller-jr)

## <cite>A Series of Unfortunate Events</cite> by Lemony Snicket

This series was fun and surprisingly challenging at times. I hadn't read it before, and I'm very glad [I read it](/2018/07/16/reading/#a-series-of-unfortunate-events-by-lemony-snicket) last year.

## <cite>The Expanse</cite>

<cite>The Expanse</cite> series [remains](/2018/01/04/2017-in-reading/#the-expanse) [tremendous fun](/2018/12/30/recent-reading/#leviathan-wakes-and-babylons-ashes-by-james-sa-corey). If you like space opera, or if you even just like stories set in space, I highly recommend you read this series.

## <cite>The Remnant Fleet</cite> by Geonn Cannon

This was a fun, queer, and relatively short space opera that I stumbled upon. Of course [I loved it.](/2018/12/30/recent-reading/#the-remnant-fleet-by-geonn-cannon)

## <cite>Remembrance of Earth’s Past</cite> by Liu Cixin

This is the trilogy written by Liu Cixin and comprised of <cite>The Three-Body Problem</cite>, <cite>The Dark Forest</cite>, and <cite>Death’s End</cite> (translated Ken Liu and Joel Martinsen). [I really enjoyed](/2018/12/30/recent-reading/#the-three-body-problem-the-dark-forest-and-deaths-end-by-liu-cixin-translated-ken-liu-and-joel-martinsen) this imaginative and expansive trilogy.

## Nonfiction Hits

Here's some of the best nonfiction I read in 2018:

* [<cite>Dream Hoarders: How the American Upper Middle Class Is Leaving Everyone Else in the Dust, Why That Is a Problem, and What to Do About It</cite>](/2018/02/08/reading/#dream-hoarders-how-the-american-upper-middle-class-is-leaving-everyone-else-in-the-dust-why-that-is-a-problem-and-what-to-do-about-it-by-richard-v-reeves) by Richard Reeves
* [<cite>The Imperial University: Academic Repression and Scholarly Dissent</cite>](/2018/07/16/reading/#the-imperial-university-academic-repression-and-scholarly-dissent-edited-piya-chatterjee-and-sunaina-maira) edited Piya Chatterjee and Sunaina Maira
* [<cite>The Hacked World Order: How Nations Fight, Trade, Maneuver, and Manipulate in the Digital Age</cite>](/2018/07/16/reading/#the-hacked-world-order-how-nations-fight-trade-maneuver-and-manipulate-in-the-digital-age-by-adam-segal) by Adam Segal
* [<cite>Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the Prison</cite>](/2018/12/31/discipline-and-punish/) by Michel Foucault

## Short Fiction

And of course I read a ton of short fiction last year too. Check out my ["Favorite 2018 Short Stories"](/2019/01/19/favorite-2018-short-stories/) post for more on that.
