---
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Cam Coulter <git@camcoulter.com>
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
title: "2019 in Reading"
description: "Here’s what I read in 2019."
date: 2020-01-10T08:11:00-08:00 # PST is -08:00, PDT is -07:00
date_modified: 2023-01-04T19:55:00-08:00 # PST is -08:00, PDT is -07:00
categorizedUnder:
- reading
taggedWith:
- year in review
image: books-06
---

[INSERT_TOC]

## Introduction

Here's all the books that I read in 2019:

<ol>
<li><cite>Walkaway</cite> by Cory Doctorow</li>
<li>
  <cite>Zen to Done: The Ultimate Simple Productivity System</cite> by Leo
  Babauta
</li>
<li>
  <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 26</cite> edited by Lynne M. Thomas and Michael
  Damian Thomas
</li>
<li>
  <cite>Dreams &amp; Nightmares 110</cite> edited by David C. Kopaska-Merkel
  <i>(poetry)</i>
</li>
<li><cite>The Only Harmless Great Thing</cite> by Brooke Bolander</li>
<li>
  <cite>Dreams &amp; Nightmares 111</cite> edited by David C. Kopaska-Merkel
  <i>(poetry)</i>
</li>
<li>
  <cite>Born to the Blade: Season 1</cite> by Michael R. Underwood, Marie
  Brennan, Malka Older, Cassandra Khaw
</li>
<li><cite>A People’s History of the United States</cite> by Howard Zinn</li>
<li><cite>Acadie</cite> by Dave Hutchinson</li>
<li><cite>The Stars Change</cite> by Mary Anne Mohanraj</li>
<li>
  <cite>A People’s Future of the United States</cite> edited by Victor LaValle
  and John Joseph Adams
</li>
<li><cite>The Lamb Will Slaughter the Lion</cite> by Margaret Killjoy</li>
<li><cite>Vulture Bones Issue 4</cite> edited by B R Sanders</li>
<li>
  <cite
    >Invisible Planets: Contemporary Chinese Science Fiction in
    Translation</cite
  >
  translated and edited by Ken Liu
</li>
<li><cite>If This Goes On</cite> edited by Cat Rambo</li>
<li><cite>The Grace of Kings</cite> by Ken Liu</li>
<li><cite>Miranda in Milan</cite> by Katharine Duckett</li>
<li>
  <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 27</cite> edited by Lynne M. Thomas and Michael
  Damian Thomas
</li>
<li>
  <cite>Legalizing LGBT Families: How the Law Shapes Parenthood</cite> by Amanda
  K. Baumle and D’Lane R. Compton
</li>
<li><cite>Radicalized</cite> by Cory Doctorow</li>
<li>
  <cite>Rocket Fuel: Some of the Best from Tor.com Non-Fiction</cite> edited by
  Bridget McGovern and Chris Lough
</li>
<li><cite>The Wall of Storms</cite> by Ken Liu</li>
<li>
  <cite>Do Not Go Quietly</cite> edited by Jason Sizemore &amp; Lesley Conner
</li>
<li><cite>A Whirlwind Tour of Python</cite> by Jake VanderPlas</li>
<li>
  <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 28</cite> edited by Lynne M. Thomas and Michael
  Damian Thomas
</li>
<li><cite>Plays</cite> by Roswitha of Gandersheim</li>
<li>
  <cite>Free Software Free Society (Third Edition)</cite> by Richard Stallman
</li>
<li>
  <cite
    >Sex and the Constitution: Sex, Religion, and Law from America’s Origins to
    the Twenty-First Century</cite
  >
  by Geoffrey R. Stone
</li>
<li><cite>The Black Tides of Heaven</cite> by JY Yang</li>
<li><cite>Always Outnumbered, Always Outgunned</cite> by Walter Mosley</li>
<li><cite>The Red Threads of Fortune</cite> by JY Yang</li>
<li>
  <cite>The 2019 Rhysling Anthology</cite> edited by David C. Kopaska-Merkel
  <i>(poetry)</i>
</li>
<li>
  <cite>Our Super Adventure: Video Games and Pizza Parties</cite> by Sarah
  Graley &amp; Stef Purenins <i>(comics)</i>
</li>
<li>
  <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 29</cite> edited by Lynne M. Thomas and Michael
  Damian Thomas
</li>
<li><cite>In an Absent Dream</cite> by Seanan McGuire</li>
<li><cite>So Good They Can’t Ignore You</cite> by Cal Newport</li>
<li><cite>The Wild Dead</cite> by Carrie Vaughn</li>
<li>
  <cite>Range: Why Generalists Triumph in a Specialized World</cite> by David
  Epstein <i>(skim read &amp; took notes)</i>
</li>
<li><cite>Dragon Pearl</cite> by Yoon Ha Lee</li>
<li><cite>Algorithmic Shapeshifting</cite> by Bogi Takács <i>(poetry)</i></li>
<li>
  <cite>Uncanny Magazine Issue 30: Disabled People Destroy Fantasy!</cite>
  edited by Katharine Duckett, Nicolette Barischoff, and Lisa M. Bradley
</li>
<li>
  <cite>The Second Mountain: The Quest for a Moral Life</cite> by David Brooks
</li>
<li>
  <cite>This Is How You Lose the Time War</cite> by Amal El-Mohtar and Max
  Gladstone
</li>
<li><cite>The Raven Tower</cite> by Ann Leckie</li>
<li>
  <cite
    >Atomic Habits: An Easy &amp; Proven Way to Build Good Habits &amp; Break
    Bad Ones</cite
  >
  by James Clear
</li>
<li>
  <cite>Unicorn on a Roll: Another Phoebe and Her Unicorn Adventure</cite> by
  Dana Simpson <i>(comics)</i>
</li>
<li><cite>The Truth About Forever</cite> by Sarah Dessen</li>
<li>
  <cite>Unicorn vs. Goblins: Another Phoebe and Her Unicorn Adventure</cite> by
  Dana Simpson <i>(comics)</i>
</li>
<li><cite>The Fifth Season</cite> by N.K. Jemisin</li>
<li>
  <cite>Unicorn Crossing: Another Phoebe and Her Unicorn Adventure</cite> by
  Dana Simpson <i>(comics)</i>
</li>
<li>
  <cite>Phoebe and Her Unicorn in The Magic Storm</cite> by Dana Simpson
  <i>(comics)</i>
</li>
</ol>

I also read a good chunk of short fiction. I'll have another post coming soon in which I shout out my favorite short stories originally published in 2019. But for now, let's review the highlights of the books that I read last year.

## <cite>Born to the Blade</cite>: Season 1

This was my first venture into the world of [Serial Box](https://www.serialbox.com). I [really enjoyed](/2019/03/09/recent-reading/#born-to-the-blade-season-1-by-michael-r-underwood-marie-brennan-malka-older-cassandra-khaw) this story. I feel a little burned on Serial Box now, though, because this season ended on a cliffhanger, and it looks like there's not going to be a season 2. I would like to read [<cite>The Vela</cite>](https://www.serialbox.com/serials/the-vela) from Serial Box, but I don't want to start it until I know it gets some sort of resolution.

## Favorite Novels

* <cite>Walkaway</cite> by Cory Doctorow: a fun and fascinating novel about the end of capitalism and the end of death. [I absolutely loved it.](/2019/03/09/recent-reading/#walkaway-by-cory-doctorow)
* <cite>The Grace of Kings</cite> and <cite>The Wall of Storms</cite> by Ken Liu: Just wow. These books are stunning achievements. I'm dying to read book three in this series. More of my thoughts [here](/2019/07/20/recent-reading/#the-grace-of-kings-and-the-wall-of-storms-by-ken-liu).
* <cite>The Wild Dead</cite> by Carrie Vaugh: a tremendously fun and smart post-apocalyptic murder mystery. It's a sequel to [<cite>Bannerless</cite>](/2017/11/01/reading/#bannerless-by-carrie-vaughn), which I also loved.
* <cite>The Raven Tower</cite> by Ann Leckie: This is Ann Leckie's new book. Therefore, it is superb.
* <cite>The Fifth Season</cite> by N.K. Jemisin: I now understand why this series won all the Hugos. I am really looking forward to reading the next two books in the trilogy.

## Favorite Novellas

Two standout novellas that I read last year were <cite>In an Absent Dream</cite> by Seanan McGuire and <cite>The Stars Change</cite> by Mary Anne Mohanraj.

<cite>In an Absent Dream</cite> is the latest book in McGuire's Wayward Children series. This book was wonderful. The series is phenomenal. Here are my thoughts on the first three books in the series: [<cite>Every Heart a Doorway</cite>](/2016/10/12/every-heart-a-doorway/), [<cite>Down Among the Sticks and Bones</cite>](/2017/09/25/reading/#down-among-the-sticks-and-bones-by-seanan-mcguire), and [<cite>Beneath the Sugar Sky</cite>](/2018/02/08/reading/#beneath-the-sugar-sky-by-seanan-mcguire).

<cite>The Stars Change</cite> is amazing. [Check here](/2019/03/09/recent-reading/#the-stars-change-by-mary-anne-mohanraj) for my thoughts on it.

## Comics!

<cite>Our Super Adventure: Video Games and Pizza Parties</cite> by Sarah Graley & Stef Purenins was delightful. If you're unfamiliar with their cute, geeky diary comic [<cite>Our Super Adventure</cite>](https://www.oursuperadventure.com/), you should definitely check it out.

I've also been reading Dana Simpson's [<cite>Phoebe and Her Unicorn</cite>](https://www.gocomics.com/phoebe-and-her-unicorn) books. Again, if you haven't read these, you gotta check them out. This comic series rivals (and honestly I enjoy more than) <cite>Calvin and Hobbes</cite> and <cite>The Peanuts</cite>. I particularly loved <cite>Phoebe and Her Unicorn in The Magic Storm</cite>, which was a graphic novel rather than a collection of individual strips.

Related, you should also definitely be following [<cite>Pepper & Carrot</cite>](https://www.peppercarrot.com/), a gorgeous and funny web comic about a young witch and her cat.

## Nonfiction Hits

Here are my favorite nonfiction reads from 2019:

* [<cite>A People’s History of the United States</cite> by Howard Zinn](/2019/04/06/peoples-history/): the critical view of US American history that they don't teach you (but should) in school
* <cite>Sex and the Constitution: Sex, Religion, and Law from America’s Origins to the Twenty-First Century</cite> by Geoffrey R. Stone: an engaging, deeply informative, and actually really fun read all about sex, contraception, abortion, same-sex marriage, censorship, obscenity, morality, religion, and law in the US.
* <cite>The Second Mountain: The Quest for a Moral Life</cite> by David Brooks: a thoughtful and persuasive book in which David Brooks argues that lives of meaning and purpose are rooted in commitments to a spouse and a family, to a vocation, to a philosophy or faith, and to a local community.
* <cite>So Good They Can’t Ignore You</cite> by Cal Newport: an easy, interesting, and persuasive read. Somewhat counter-intuitive. Newport argues that rather than following your preexisting passions, you should instead cultivate rare and valuable skills in order to have a successful career that you enjoy.
* <cite>Atomic Habits: An Easy & Proven Way to Build Good Habits & Break Bad Ones</cite> by James Clear: an engaging, informative, and easy read all about habits. If you want to cultivate good habits, start here.
